okay my name is Dennis Cunningham I'm a
lawyer and I have worked on the case off
and on during the time it's been in
existence and now I'm going around
trying to drum up interest in it while
my two partners are back in Chicago
trying it day in day out for the last 15
months I'm Don Johnson I'm a writer and
reporter and at the time actor was
killed I was a correspondent in Chicago
for Newsweek magazine and had been
following the case ever since my name is
Ronald saseru and I'm a plaintiff in the
suit and I'm a survivor I was one of the
occupants in the apartment at night I
was in the North bedroom which was
adjacent to Fred's room and I was shot
six times with machine-gun fire right
now
I'm just going to court trying to find
out what's gonna come about this suit
I'm Mike gray and I made the film the
murder of Fred Hampton with Howard all
obviously being in the room didn't tell
you everything that was going on because
a lot was going on behind the scenes but
what was it like in terms of the days
leading up was the kind of atmosphere
back in in the days when the Panther
Party and the US government were at
direct loggerheads and obviously the FBI
and the local police were doing a lot
not only in Chicago but as we know now
many places around the country to put
down the organization well at that
particular time as I recall it there was
a lot of harassment that members of the
party received in the form of being
arrested for selling newspapers you know
being stopped in automobiles and giving
tickets and stuff and I've been taken to
jail you know there were a lot of end
justices that we are you know received
and at that time
to understand the movie within the black
community and you know the relationship
that Black Panther Party had the
animosity between the data organization
and the police was only a reflection
between you know the police and the
black community because at that time a
lot of people had been gunned down and
it was real tense at this particular
time because Fred had had his appeal
denied so he knew he was going to go
back to jail and you know some people
thought - he might not go back to jail
that he might you know wanna become a
fugitive what about the morning itself
what do you remember of it very much
well I don't think I ever will forget it
you know you know I was in bed asleep
and I recall being awakened by a knock
on the door and it was only a matter of
seconds after that when I heard gunfire
and I realized bullets was coming
through the room so after I got up in
attempted to put my clothes on the only
thing I could think of doing was getting
on the floor and that's where I was shot
while on the floor I was thinking about
I think I was in Chicago right right
before that and I know the Chicago
police seemed to have a very good and
specific knowledge of the movement in
Chicago if you walked around the streets
with people who were active in the
movement just beat cops would say hello
you know recognize people by name and
say that it seemed like they knew a lot
more than they ought to know if they
were just essentially doing their
business what kind of an operation was
going on we got the FBI involved that
the police involved
how heavily were they into anti Panther
activity and other political
organizations okay well it turns out now
that that they were deeply involved in
it and we didn't really know it at the
time I think we sensed it I think that
you know we would talk about it J Edgar
Hoover said in the middle of 69 that the
Black Panther Party was the greatest
menace to the internal security of the
country and if we had known then just
functionally what we know now about the
way they operate I guess we could have
deduced a lot of the stuff they were
doing it turns out that they had a
really broad complicated widespread you
know very conscious program of political
suppression that they were operating
primarily against the Black Panther
Party but also against other groups SDS
notably I think they were a little less
successful in penetrating some other
groups than they were with the party but
they also had a lot of more a better way
to move which was to agitate local
police departments against the Panthers
and I think that that's what's being
found out and what will be found out is
that in where there were confrontations
as there were all over the country
between Panther Party members and and
local police departments I mean they
were in Detroit in Colorado and Des
Moines Iowa New Orleans and LA and San
Francisco again and again and in Oakland
and New York and Brooklyn and Chicago
and you know other places New Haven and
the FBI had a counterintelligence
program that's reached into all those
cities and I think a total of 22 cities
where they had Panther squads that were
active on one level or another and where
the documents that have come to light in
our trials show that they were actively
trying to not just watch him but to
undermine what they were doing to
disrupt their activities to cause them
to get hurt or killed - they fermented
the the conflicts between the Black
Panther Party in the united slaves
organization in los angeles and san
diego and you can read their memoranda
and reports and see them saying we got
to capitalize on these differences we
have to do whatever we can to [ __ ]
the black panthers then we refer to
shootouts and killings and things like
this and with with i mean they would
brag about their accomplishments to each
other in these memos and they did in
terms of the raid in chicago they they
they paid a special bonus to the
informant o'neill of $300.00 and they
had applied for this in terms of by the
time of the raid just for in behalf of
the information that had already been
provided and there's a memo coming back
from Hoover's office saying well in
connection with your suggestion that we
give O'Neil a bonus why don't you tell
us all about how instrumental he was in
the raid where Fred Hampton was killed
and there's a memo back saying well you
know they couldn't have done this raid
without the information he provided and
it was of great value save the lives of
police officers in this raid where I
mean they just they're glowing with
pride you know and he was paid this
money and there are other similarly deep
and you know like profound showings in
these memoranda of how deeply they were
into trying to wipe out the party you
know trying to do it in by any means
that they could come across they they
they sent of anonymous letters to people
like the head of the there's a big big
kind of combined street gang
organization in South Side of Chicago
the black p stone nation really a huge
federation of former just
gangs and they sent a letter to the
leader of that saying that the Panthers
had a contract out for him and that why
didn't he do something about it you know
and then they wrote they have to write
reports to get permission to do stuff
like this and they say why they think
it's going to work and you know and they
say possibly this will cause the Rangers
to take the p stone nation to take
retaliatory action in the end against
the Panther leadership you know it's all
right out there and and there's enough
of it in our case to show that it was
going on everyplace you know and there's
some stuff else it's some stuff that
also came out before the Senate
committee the church committee that that
is clearly you know establishes that
this was going on yet the vast you know
bulk of it is still being suppressed and
and I mean the Panthers and their
friends from those days have always said
there were as many as 25 or 30 people
that were murdered that you know one way
or another because of police and FBI
action and you know I mean they've never
been taken up on it you know there are
beginning to be more and more lawsuits
to this nature around the country you
know not a lot of them are more general
they go against they go on behalf of
lots of groups against all law
enforcement that was engaged in that but
it's clear that that a major major
principle of the FBI strategy of
disruption of such groups including you
know the peace movement and the women's
movement and Nam more recently the
Puerto Rican independence move in the
American Indian woman but back then
especially against the black movement
was to foment local police departments
you know and and try to provoke
confrontations in this case in Chicago
is the one where they were by far the
most successful I went beyond that I
mean the evidence is clear that it was
an outright hit you know they broke in
the door and made for the bedroom where
they knew he'd be sleeping and fired
machine gun bullets into his head and
killed him before he could wake on I
just would like to ask how what what
kind of role do you think the film is
played as far as providing information
that's alternative to what the official
reports
several years ago but do you feel that
it's played a role as far as this case
is concerned the principle effect of the
film when people see the movie I think
that they're moved by being able to see
Hampton when he was alive it's time that
he died he was only 21 so most of the
footage that you see him in the film
he's 20 years old and overpowering but
because of a very unusual set of
circumstances really quite unique I
think in history we were able to gain
access to a filmed police reenactment of
the raid now the reason for that was
Hanrahan the state's attorney was
shocked by the public outcry that
greeted Hamptons death he fit I mean as
one person said at the time they'd been
blowing [ __ ] away in Chicago for
years and nobody ever said anything he
must have been the most surprised man in
all of Chicago that morning when there
was a furor and it was national in scope
what Hanrahan did not realize and the
chicago establishment was that Hampton
had a broad base of public support even
among people who perhaps didn't agree
with his politics specifically respected
the young man tremendously admired him
there was a great segment of the
business community that felt that
Hampton was you know a really
responsible human being and this public
outcry immediately focused upon Hanrahan
in the state's attorney's police and
there were cries of murder in public
within hours after the raid and so he
responded to that by having the 14
policemen give an exclusive report of
the raid to the Chicago Tribune which
published photographs that were provided
by the police that circled bullet holes
that proved that the Panthers had fired
at the police and then they offered an
exclusive
of reenactment to all three Chicago
television stations and they were turned
down except WBBM the local CBS affiliate
went for it the conditions were
unacceptable to NBC and ABC because
Hanrahan the state's attorney demanded
the right to edit the presentation even
though it ran on the news in other words
was gonna be privately edited filmed by
the state's attorney presented the news
they did it and you see this very arch
presentation each officer going through
the reenactment one step at a time I
then I stepped over here I put the
machine gun in single fire and I very
careful not to hit the woman on the bed
in front of me I moved the machine gun
up and he's talking about firing through
the wall of the apartment and this
version of the raid which recounts how
the Panthers fired at them and they
asked three times for cease fire and so
forth we simply took that material and
cut it against the footage that we shot
in the apartment on that morning and the
effect is overwhelming you don't really
need to know any more than that because
you can see the police saying the
straight-faced offering their position
and all the say only in this case quite
it's totally unique
we had the footage in that apartment
from that morning and and the effect is
overpowering also seeing the official
propaganda next to the footage that that
you had and just the inner cutting
between the two provides a whole
different story from what was broadcast
and what was printed up one of the
things that always impresses me in that
film is that conversation about of
Hanrahan in a press conference trying to
defend the photographs that he gave the
chicago tribune and then you you see a
piece of TV news film and the announcer
points down and says here we see the
nail heads in the door that we're
supposed to be bullet holes here is a
tight closeup of nail head and part of
the door has been you see all this stuff
cut together with the state's attorney
straight face statement it's devastating
and also you see all of the press
conference footage of Hanrahan as he is
repeated
we backed away from a position one tie
then the next time and then the next
time he has to keep consonant finally at
the end he's totally shattered and looks
completely unstrung anybody's still
vamping you know and and it's a it's
there is no possibility that you can see
the film objectively and not come to the
same conclusion that we did when we
decided that the only logical name for
the movie was the murder of Fred Hampton
and one of the interesting things that I
just found out that the whole raid may
have been over in less than a minute
that in fact they came in that it didn't
last 15 minutes as the police stated in
their version that it lasted a matter of
seconds that they came into the front
door in the back door simultaneously and
with a military precision with covering
fire in all in you know like in right
directions knowing exactly from the
blueprint which was provided by the FBI
informant who a doc wasn't he there in
the apartment that the night before it
and he leave earlier
what time was he and he but you Doc
satchel was in the apartment that night
and the FBI informant who had
unbeknownst to him given the blueprint
of the apartment to the FBI was there in
the apartment do you remember anything
about that evening well I was near
myself that much but I dunno Neil came
over there earlier right obviously he
wasn't interested in hanging around for
the action but he certainly provided all
the information and as I understand it
Dennis there is now some serious
corroboration for the allegations that
Hampton may have been drugged at the
time that he died is that true that's
also true there has been just ever since
shortly after the killings there was a
you know chemical tests on his blood by
chemist who was working with a
pathologist that had been involved in a
case by the family
and there's been this was after a report
by the coroner's office found no
evidence of alcohol and it was silent as
to any drugs and it was apparently just
a routine test done and then this test
was done and it was a positive
indication of of a presence of Seco
Barbuto in a fairly strong dose and and
the woman who did that test testified in
the trial of a few weeks ago and I think
had very convincing evidence that this
was that in fact this was true
now the FBI in connection with the grand
jury investigation later on in January
in February of 1970 obtained an
exclamation order out of the federal
court in Chicago and did a third autopsy
and claimed at that time to have
established that there was no trace of
single Barbuto in the blood but this was
later pretty thoroughly refuted by a lot
of expert testimony to the effect that
the blood would have or that the
substance would have deteriorated by
that time and it would have been would
also have been neutralized by various
embalming processes things of this
nature so that they that the test at the
later date was not reliable and so I
think you know largely the the hurt test
stands dr. Varmus test stands and and
the presumption has to be that that he
did somehow ingest a strong dose of
sleeping powder within you know late
that night we then had been within a
couple of hours at the most of the time
he fell asleep which has been pretty
well established as haven't been made me
1 1:30 in the morning
the corroboration is that two people
went from the front room
into his bedroom when they first began
to break in the door and couldn't wake
him two to Allah verse answers yea they
were asleep in the front room which was
right where the front door was that they
came in through there were altogether
four people in that room three in the
middle bedroom where doc was and two in
the back and two of the two guys got up
in the front room and ran to the back to
waken him and couldn't waken him and
Deborah Johnson who was in the bed with
him testified that she he sort of raised
his head and sort of looked like he was
trying to wake up and then dropped his
head back on the pillow and this was
after the bullets had already begun to
come into the room and she said she
could feel the mattress jumping with the
bullets that were fired in there yes
we're talking about I think it's
important for people remember it wasn't
last year that we're talking about it
was you know in 1969 and it was a really
difficult time I was a reporter on the
street it was a very very political time
and what is uh I think what we're trying
to find out is whether this was a
political assassination one of those
that we know occurred overseas for
instance you know we're trying to find
it's not there's no that nobody can deny
that there was a massive cover-up I mean
I'm really ashamed
it was fortunately it was a real sloppy
job but the attempt was really smooth to
cover up beginning from the very first
morning beginning with the very people
who were in charge of collecting
evidence they started covering up from
the beginning and and it still continues
I wanted to ask you as a reporter for
Newsweek magazine
yes well did you get involved in
covering the Black Panther Party
activities and then how did that evolve
into your present I was simply a member
of the Chicago Bureau at the time and
and anything that was happening and you
know in the eleven states around the
Midwest
I could cover and well there were there
was really a lot of media interest in
the Black Panthers at the time most most
of it thoroughly wrong
just bad reporting very often you know
for instance I remember sitting i
remember after one raid in June of 1969
going to the Black Panther headquarters
and looking through around the
headquarters and I walked upstairs and
there was a storage room and we're
breakfast for children had been stored
well it was all charred the police had
set fire to it what they told the press
was that they were using a new kind of
bullet that you know and the press
printed it nobody really dog anymore but
it later on
last year sitting in court in the
courtroom in Chicago and listening wild
documents came out talking about just
how J Edgar Hoover personally felt about
the Panthers breakfast for children
program and it makes you kind of sick
you know because I know it they burned
it what is what is happening in terms of
I mean you've got a suit which is a
civil action I assume not being the
state you can't file criminal charges
criminal charges were filed at one time
and what happened to those and what if
any hope is there and people who want to
see justice done that there will be
justice done in a criminal sense in any
of these associated areas well there was
a criminal case in Circuit Court of Cook
County in 1971 and 72 with a special
grand jury a special prosecutor
appointed by the local presiding judge
of the Criminal Court
and it was against Harahan and his
assistant and the police who were in the
raid and some of the police who were the
crime lab technicians that came on
evidence technicians that came on the
scene right afterwards and firearms
experts who had faked reports and it was
for obstruction of justice they were
indicted for obstruction of justice in
connection with the things they had said
and done after the raid to cover up the
true nature of what had happened there
and the evidence was the discrepancies
between for example the bullet holes in
the walls and the thing that aide said
it had been done and it was really the
the the special prosecutors did what
they could in their way and they were I
think opposed all the way through when a
lot of quiet and noisy ways and and
beginning with the very grand jury
itself that was selected but they were
also not really they didn't go they
didn't fight it real hard either and
that trial lasted several months and at
the end of the state's case the judge
threw the whole thing out and acquitted
everybody never went to the jury and
there there was no jury that was one of
the things that happen at the defendants
liked to judge and hope to try the case
with him and the special prosecutor
agreed to the waiver of the jury and put
his case before the judge and as I say
it was only for obstruction it only had
to do with proving statements and
discrepancies and trying to prove some
substance of what had happened
the Panthers are or many of them
testified in the trial and so if today
Cook County District Attorney wanted to
file charges against participants in the
raid for conspiracy to commit murder or
for murder itself there wouldn't be
anything in the legal system preventing
them from doing that probably not there
would be it would certainly be a defense
that they would seek to raise that they
had you know been acquitted of
substantially the same and substantially
the same conduct but I don't think there
would be a bar against prosecuting them
there's no statute of limitations on
murder
but the FBI didn't testify and then the
FBI thing was totally unknown during
that entire case so that there's whole
other levels of conspiracy that now can
be shown although not necessarily with
all the Raiders but certainly with the
leaders of the raid
well speaking politically is there any
semblance of reality in that kind of
action taking place well I would say not
in the immediate future I think that I
wouldn't want to beg the question will
happen in the long run because I think
we already have been engaged in a long
struggle to bring out the truth and the
truth should lead to a settling of
accounts with people who have been
guilty of this type of thing if indeed
that's what can be shown and we think
it's very clear that it was conscious
and deliberate murder and that it was
done for political reasons and that it
was not unique and so but I think that
just by virtue of that reality it's
gonna wait before there's any accounting
until there's enough people who demand
one justice will not come that Black
Liberation Army says until the people
rise up and see justice done this civil
suit what are your expectations what are
you asking for and what are your
expectations in terms of time 15 months
is a long time for a trial how much
longer you do do you foresee and what do
you hope the outcome will be
well we're suing for a lot of money in
actual damages and punitive damage
we're not real optimistic about being
able to collect any and I think no
matter what the outcome is dove the
appeal by both sides this could go on
for a long time and and the chances of
the plaintiffs ever getting any cash
money into their hands even if they do
get an award from the jury are well
they're probably medical you know it
because of all the legal avenues that
will remain we nevertheless it has to be
pursued on that level it's a jury
verdict will may be a big decision in
terms of the claims and conflicting
claims about what happened and what the
what the truth is about what happened so
I don't know we're just gonna push it
through it now you may go another two or
three months or another five or six
months depending on how much of a
defense is put in how much evidence the
police and the FBI want to put in to to
try to prove that they didn't do what we
said they did mainly their strategy has
been during the presentations of
plaintiffs evidence which is now almost
complete has been to just try to smear
the panthers and make everybody feel
make the jury feel that Island gotten
level you know it might have been bad he
might have violated their rights but it
had to be done because these people are
so dangerous the Panthers and two
otherwise just some skewer what happened
and double-talk their way into trying to
I mean hope that the jury will just
reject it the judge seems very much
enlisted in this program and and has
been militant against the admission of
difficult evidences particularly against
the FBI he's just found a million weird
excuses he hasn't scrupled to make the
crazy legal rulings to keep things out
he protected the witnesses who were
confronted with their own previous
statements and with the contents of the
documents which somehow came to light
despite his willingness to see them
suppress and he's just been it's we have
long since taken the position about this
judge that he's out to beat us you know
particularly as to the FBI
we had an affidavit from a former member
of the United States Attorney's Office
who
to represent the FBI agents in the early
part of the case who said that he told
him you know they'll never prove the FBI
killed those fellows and he's like he's
trying to make that come true so it's
been very difficult in court I mean it's
been you know the cover-up just extends
and extends and moves into places where
it needs to be because the impulse to
covered up is very strong I think the we
feel that the press has played along
with this and in substantial part with
again exceptions you know and they've
obviously been exceptions in their
judges rulings and there has to be
because the weight of the truth is so
great you know and it moves on all
fronts and the cover-up has been it's
massive and sustained but it can't last
forever